Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson.
Edward Bryant is on the forefront of the young writers who will likely shape the course of science fiction in the 80s and 90s.
We ask Bryant his definition of science fiction.
Science fiction is essentially the same as any other fiction.
It's fiction about people, about characters, about the relationships between one character and another or one character in a group, which may be society.
With the difference from mainstream fiction being that in science fiction there is some sort of scientific or technological development which is important to the story
and which affects those human relationships between person and other person or person and people as a group.
Bryant grew up on a ranch in Wyoming. After he completed graduate school he began writing short stories.
To date he has published three collections of short stories, among the dead, cinnabar, and particle theory.
We ask Bryant why he prefers to work in the medium of the short story.
It's not a matter of conscious choice. I write what I do because that is what I do.
I plan to write novels. Of course I've been planning to write novels for a long time.
My publisher is expecting by October 1st a novel which was originally contracted in 1974.
This is a long while to be dithering about completing the book.
Short stories have just always seemed to me the appropriate medium that I should work in.
In some ways to a degree I feel like short stories are mini novels because I have often spent much more time in terms of working out the characterizations, the plots and so forth and so on
than the amount of space in that short story would indicate.
There are stories of mine that seem to me to be almost compressed novels that under other circumstances were I more a prolific writer
I probably could have expanded them out another 54,000 words and got a nice paperback original novel.
But I like to work with the compression sometimes. I like to pack an incredible amount which is a risk of course because I fully recognize that a lot of people who read my stuff don't care to deal in that sort of thing.
They don't want to have to worry about putting that kind of energy into reading a short story that they might ordinarily apply to at least starting to approach a novel.
Phoenix Without Ashes is Brian's only novel published today and it's a collaboration with Harlan Ellison. We ask if he is planning to publish a novel eventually.
I think I really believe that there are things that I want to write about that I can treat much better as novels but I can't assure stories and I think I would do that.
I think right now the bottleneck factor is that I haven't done a scratch novel that's worked. I've done Phoenix which is a novelization.
I've done Cinnabar which is a sort of piece work novel made up of parts that were originally published as short stories.
And I've done a 60,000 word novel which remains in my files, has never been rewritten, has never been submitted professionally, is not science fiction or fantasy.
It's the traditional college novel that editors know and abominate. They get thousands of them every year. They're the novels that people write just after college in which the young writer says,
well I have come of age in this society and here are the wonderful truths that I have learned and they put all this into fiction and it's usually just pretty terrible stuff.
More on Edward Bryant on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson.
Science Fiction writer Edward Bryant is the subject of today's show.
Probably Bryant's most important contribution to date is his collection of connected stories called Cinnabar. Here Bryant tells something about the city of Cinnabar, the place around which the stories revolve.
No matter what the story is or novel, no matter how complex the ultimate product might be, originally there always is the single image somewhere along the line that everything else is generated from.
In the case of Cinnabar, I suppose the overriding image is the city itself, the city that exists presumably millions of years in our future and may or may not exist here on earth.
That's never really spelled out nor did I feel it important to do so.
Although I suspect to pin down, I would suggest that Cinnabar is probably very close to Phoenix, Arizona.
I shouldn't be surprised.
But in the late 1960s, I just had the image of the far future, very colorful, emerald city of Oz, sort of apparition wavering out there on the desert horizon.
And of course, once the image was there, then all the questions of both fiction in general and science fiction in particular generated such as, okay, what is that city all about? Who lives there? What do they do?
I wanted to write about a city of such sophistication and decadence that science and technology, as Arthur C. Clarke put it in a different context, might as well be magic.
And I wanted to, in terms of the human element, investigate what would people do with their access to immortality, with their access to technological powers beyond compare.
Would their lives be any less screwed up than they are now in 20th century America or not?
So again, I was going back to that original premise that I believe in, that good fiction is about people and their relationships.
And if you have access to physical immortality, for example, how does this affect your relationship with the people that are closest to you and the people that you interact with every day on the street?
And that's what Cinnabar finally is all about.
Although Bryant conceived of the stories as separate entities, he eventually realized how closely tied they all are.
And it came as a great surprise to me, as I wrote these stories about that fabulous city, that there was an all over structure that seemed to be coming out independent of each individual story.
And that's why when you read the stories altogether in a book, I feel there is a clear cut beginning and a clear cut ending, and there is progress made through the stories, almost as though one were reading a from scratch novel, even though of course it isn't.
I weasel a lot with the definition of what is a novel there and what isn't.
Still, the background is the same from story to story. Most of the characters are the same from story to story.
The origin of the name Cinnabar is an interesting story. Here Bryant tells us what inspired it.
Now the city title.
Strangely enough came originally from a photograph of a horse.
My mother, in her living room, has a beautiful photograph of the head of a palomino.
This was a picture she told me about when I was growing up, because this was the horse that she used to ride in the summers out at a dude ranch in upstate New York called the Cinnabar.
And I'd always loved the sound of the word. It conjured up all sorts of images for me that I think went far beyond your standard upstate New York dude ranch.
More on Edward Bryant's Cinnabar next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Cinnabar is a production of the Cinnabar, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And to Bill Vernon.
Our show today centers again on the Cinnabar stories by Edward Bryant.
In the acknowledgments of Cinnabar, Bryant writes, to Joan Bernat, who pioneered in the writing of Cinnabar stories. Here he explains this acknowledgement.
Joan Bernat was a very good writer who did a number of stories at the early Clarion workshops, which were published in various anthologies, and I have no idea where she is now.
But at one point in the workshop, we'd done an exercise in which each of us came up with various narrative hooks, first lines of stories which were calculated to catch the interest of the reader.
And I had done a story hook which went along the lines of, oh, I think the road to Cinnabar was lined with the shells of burnt out school buses.
And I had no particular reason for coming up with this line other than, to me, it was interesting.
And also, this was vaguely tied in with my image of Cinnabar, the city.
Well, a number of people in the workshop borrowed other people's narrative hooks and wrote stories around them.
And Joan Bernat actually did the first Cinnabar story in the sense that she wrote a story which started with that line.
And her Cinnabar was not quite the same as mine, but still there was something of the feeling about it, the almost surrealistic image of the city wavering on the horizon,
and the city which is totally cut off from the entire rest of the world, in fact, for all intents and purposes, is the entire world.
And so that's why Joan Bernat got the acknowledgement at the beginning of the book.
The stories collected in Cinnabar are not the only Cinnabar stories. Others have been published elsewhere.
We asked Bride if he has plans to write still other stories in the Cinnabar milieu.
I've thought about it. I have notes on several Cinnabar stories, including the possibility of doing five novelettes which would come together as another make-up novel about the character Jade Blue.
My publisher and I would like to do a new edition of Cinnabar with a brand new Cinnabar story in it.
But I don't know. I just haven't been able to do a Cinnabar story. It may be that its time has passed in terms of my own professional nature.
The Cinnabar stories that I've got planned out would take place before the time of the stories in the book itself, because of course at the end of the book, I don't think I'm giving away any plot secrets here.
Cinnabar is in the process of being destroyed. And I've had no desire to write stories about Cinnabar after the fall.
But before there are still possibilities, I would like to do, for example, a story about a man in Cinnabar who comes up with the greatest decadent luxury anyone could have.
I thought for a long time about what single luxury would be the most decadent, the most useless example of conspicuous affluence.
And I realized, of course, that probably what would be comprised in that would be having your own roller coaster.
I mean, think how decadent to have your own roller coaster sitting out behind your house, which only you use, or your friends, of course.
And so immediately, because I love roller coasters a lot, started to design my own version of the ultimate roller coaster.
And that is going to be the central image in that particular story, if it's ever written.
Another Cinnabar story, which is yet unwritten, is what happens when Turmaline Hayes decides to have an enormous party at which she invites every single one of her old lovers.
Of which she has quite a few. And this will simply be a party at which you have no idea whether it's going to be a romantic comedy or a murder mystery.
A lot of possibilities there.
In our next show, we'll talk more about Edward Bryant.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
So stay with us.
This is David Carson.
And Bill Vernon.
Today we continue with our interview with Science Fiction author Edward Bryant.
Those who are at all familiar with Bryant's work have certainly come across his apparent fascination with sharks.
Here he explains how this attraction was spawned, then how it led to the famous short story titled, simply, Shark.
Why sharks?
When people visit my apartment, they see all sorts of shark paraphernalia, you know, jaws mounted on backboards and shark mobiles, shark paintings and so forth and so on.
The reason for the shark motif and the reason that I suppose I've adopted the shark as a sort of totem is because in the early 70s, one of my closest friends had dreamed the night before,
and she told me about this at breakfast, that she had been in the body of a shark.
She had seen the world through shark-colored lenses.
And we talked about this for a while, you know, got past the obvious Freudian symbolism of it all, and I was fascinated by the dream.
Then she catalyzed action by saying, listen, why don't you write a story about sharks?
Now I didn't know anything about sharks.
I was just an inland boy who'd grown up far from the sea, and although the ocean is always fascinated me, I didn't know about sharks.
But I did my research, just as with site particle theory.
I found out about sharks.
I became intrigued by their position in the evolutionary scheme of things, how incredibly well developed they are.
And I was also struck by such images as the fact that the shark is the major species of creature, which is hostile to human beings, which is in no danger of extinction, at least at this point.
So I took my friend's original dream, and I said, okay, I've got a character who wants to be a shark.
Why does she want to be a shark?
How does she become a shark, both metaphorically and literally?
And that's how the original shark story generated.
I realized after finishing the story that there were other things that involved sharks that I had not dealt with in the story that I would treat in various other pieces.
When Bryant's friends got one of his newfound fascination, he began to be bombarded with shark mementos.
What happened then, of course, was, the older you get, the harder you are to shop for your friends and relatives.
They don't know what to get you.
They don't know what your tastes are.
They don't know what books you've read or what albums you don't have.
So somehow the shark story caught the fancy of the people around me, and I started giving me shark paraphernalia.
Before I knew it, I had more sharks than I knew what to do with.
I'm glad it was sharks because Jaws Not was standing.
There never has been that much in the way of shark artifacts for sale.
If it had been unicorns or dragons, say, I would have been swamped completely and utterly, and I could have knick-knack and gigoa garage sales.
But instead, I've got some pretty neat shark stuff.
Does Bryant really like sharks?
I would say, though, that people ask me, do I really like sharks?
And I have to admit, I don't like sharks.
Nobody likes sharks, but I respect sharks.
And sharks as an emblem, as a symbol, truly do fascinate me.
And I expect there will be other shark stories.
There may even be a shark novel.
What militates against a shark novel, of course, quite aside from any of my own feelings about writing a novel, is I probably have to wait for the furor of Peter Benchley's Jaws to continue dying down.
More on Edward Bryant on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next episode will be about the science fiction radio show.
So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Bill Vernon.
In the fall of 1981, Edward Bryant's important short story collection, Particle Theory, was published.
It contains memorable stories, The Thermals of August, the Nebula Award-winning Giants, the often reprinted Shark, the Hibakusa Gallery, and the title story.
The story Particle Theory is unique in Bryant's canon in that its background is heavily laden with hard science.
Here he explains how any writer can get across hard science ideas if he uses the right resources.
Particle Theory came about because I read a newspaper article about pion beam therapy using a stream of solid particles, sub-nuclear particles to attack cancerous tumors,
which I have just found out is a line of research that has just been abandoned down at Los Alamos.
I'm not sure why, whether it's funding cutbacks or whether they've simply found better means to attack the medical problem.
But at any rate, what had intrigued me a number of years ago in the paper is now apparently scientifically dead.
And yeah, this is more of a hard science story than I customarily write, but I think it exhibits a more general principle,
which is that I or every other writer who may not be all that soundly based in science and technology by discipline or by vocation
need simply only use the research tools that we all reasonably learned in junior high to get across a hard science story without being overly didactic about it.
What I discovered in this story was that the world is full of experts who were quite willing to share with me their specialized knowledge,
whether it was particle beam physics or whether it was the landscape around Los Alamos and little details for verisimilitude such as what airline do you fly into Los Alamos on
and what sort of planes are you in and all of that kind of thing.
Bryant comments here on the fact that he does not wish to be typecast as a writer of any particular type of story.
True, ordinarily I don't use quite so much scientific content. All I can say is this was one of the stories in which that content seemed appropriate.
And it exhibits my own, in a sense, my own sense of frustration with being typecast.
I write what I like to write and sometimes that may be a story which is full of medical research about prostate cancer and particle beam therapy for that cancer and cosmology, all that.
And other times I will write science fiction stories in which there is not a speck of hard research or hard fact.
Again, I suppose it illustrates the difference between facts and truths to be facile about it.
But it also shows that good research can cover a multitude of sins.
He maintains that even with the hard science elements, particle theory is still a people's story.
This story for me is still a people's story, first and foremost.
It's again about relationships of people and the scientific content amplifies, illustrates and I hope clarifies those relationships.
But by God the people still come first and the science and technology come second.
Brian's first published short story collection, Among the Dead, came out in 1973.
It contains a number of stories written early in his career.
His novel, Phoenix Without Ashes, is in fact a novelization of Harlan Ellison's original pilot script for the ill-fated television series, The Star Lost.
This work is a rarity.
As a novelization, which came after the fact, it is actually a solid piece of work.
The planned sequels have never materialized.
Certainly, Edward Bryant has established himself as a top flight writer, who happens also to work under the label, Science Fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.